Artificial Neural Networks (ANNs) monopolize the current Artificial Intelligence (AI) systems for their higher performance than other computational models. However, the floating activation and intensive computation of ANNs cause high energy consumption. Spiking Neural Networks(SNNs), the third generation of neural network models, are the potential alternatives of ANNs for up to hundreds of times of power efficiency. Modules in SNNs communicate by asynchronous spikes as the human brain, which introduces sparse activations, event-driven computations, and consequently low power consumption.

However, there is still a huge performance gap between SNNs and ANNs, which restricts the practical values of SNNs. Complex temporal dynamics and non-differentiable firing mechanisms make it challenging to design learning methods for SNNs. Traditional bio-inspired learning methods such as the Hebbian rule and the Spike Timing Dependent Plasticity rule are unsupervised algorithms and can only solve simple learning tasks such as classifying the MNIST dataset. Primitive supervised learning methods including SpikeProp, Tempotron, and ReSuMe are limited to train SNNs with a single layer or single spike. Recently, deep learning methods have been introduced into SNNs and overwhelmed previous algorithms, growing into the booming spiking deep learning research community.

The ANN to SNN conversion and surrogate learning methods are two mainstream methods in spiking deep learning. The former is based on rate coding and approximates the activations in ANNs by firing rates in SNNs. However, it requires the SNNs to run many time steps and causes high energy consumption and long latency. It cannot solve temporal tasks because the time dimension is already occupied to represent rates. On the contrary, the surrogate learning methods are more flexible. It re-defines the gradient of the discrete Heaviside function used in spike generation by that of a smooth surrogate function and then is capable of training SNNs directly. It is not based on rate coding and can fully utilize neural dynamics to process temporal tasks such as classifying the neuromorphic data. It is not restricted to rate coding and requires much fewer time steps than the conversion methods.

This survey reviews the latest research advancements of the surrogate learning methods in spiking deep learning. The basic concepts, components, and benchmarks of SNNs are first introduced. Then learning methods are systemically divided into different categories and illustrated. A comprehensive experiment is conducted to compare these methods fairly. The advantages and shortcomings of each category are then presented. Lastly, the future research directions are discussed.

This work is partially supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China under contracts No.62425101, No.62332002, No.62027804, and No.62088102.